# CS 1541
Computer Architecture - Fall 2020

## Course Information

**Taught by:** Wonsun Ahn (wahn at pitt dot edu)
  * GitHub username: wonsunahn

**Class Time:**

  * On Zoom through Canvas
  * Hours: Tue/Thu 5:00 PM - 6:15 PM 

**Instructor's Office Hours:**

  * On Microsoft Teams
  * Hours: TBD

**Grading TA Information:**

  * Primary mode of communication: "Regrade Request" on GradeScope
  * Secondary mode of communication: Microsoft Teams
  * Hours: by appointment
  
**Class GitHub repo:** https://www.github.com/wonsunahn/CS1541_Fall2020

**Required Texts:**
* Computer Organization and Design - The Hardware/Software Interface
  By David Patterson and John Hennessy
  Fifth Edition - Morgan & Kaufmann.

This course examines computer architecture and hardware system organization.
Topics include: CPU organization and control, instruction set implementation,
cache and memory organizations, parallel architectures and GPUs.  Through the
lecture, you will learn what constrains CPU performance and various techniques
you can use to get around those constraints.  You will also learn how to build
software simulators that evaluate and estimate the performance of a CPU design,
without having to physically manufacture the physical hardware.

This class uses the _traditional class_ learning model, meaning lectures will
happen during class time and assignments are expected to be done outside of
class time.  You can choose to either attend classes in-person, synchronously
online, or asynchronously online according to the Flex@Pitt model.  Synchronous
attendance of classes (either in-person or online) is encouraged but not
required.  If you don't attend the lecture, please view the in-class discussion
through Panopto recordings available on Canvas.  The class schedule is
available on the [Syllabus](syllabus.md)).

## Grading

* Midterms (45%):
  * Midterm 1 - 22.5%
  * Midterm 2 - 22.5%
* Projects (20%):
  * Project 1 - 10%
  * Project 2 - 10%
* Homeworks (20%):
  * Homework 1 - 5%
  * Homework 2 - 5%
  * Homework 3 - 5%
  * Homework 4 - 5%
* Participation (15%)
  * TopHat lecture questions
  * Teams participation

TopHat questions will be released from time to time to review lecture
materials.  They will be mostly multiple choice or fill-in-the-blank questions.
Half of the points will be awarded for just submitting the answers and the
other half will be awarded only for correct answers.  The purpose is to make
sure that everyone is following the lecture material (in a no-child-left-behind
sense).  Hence you are free to discuss your solutions with your peers on Teams
if you aren't sure (in fact you are encouraged to).  I will give a thumbs up to
the correct answer, or leave hints if nobody got it.

More in-depth questions that apply your knowledge will be posed for the
homeworks.  There will also be two projects that involves writing a CPU
simulator using the C programming language.  Homeworks and projects are
individual work, so you are forbidden from discussing your solutions with your
peers.

Exams will NOT be allowed to be made up except with a valid and verified excuse
(generally medical - others are left to the discretion of the instructor).

The following grading scale will be used.  Note that I generally do _not_ round
grades up.

Score  | Grade
-----: | ------------------------------
100.00-93.00 | A (A+ for extraordinary work)
92.99-90.00  | A-
89.99-87.00  | B+
86.99-83.00  | B
82.99-80.00  | B-
79.99-77.00  | C+
76.99-73.00  | C
72.99-70.00  | C-
69.99-67.00  | D+
66.99-63.00  | D
62.99-60.00  | D-
59.99-0.00   | F

## Assignment submission

All projects, homeworks, and exams will be submitted using GradeScope.

There is no late submission for homeworks and exams.

There is late submission for projects.  Late projects will receive a -5 percentage point penalty per day (e.g., if
you would have received a 90% on an assignment, but you turned it in 3 days
late, you would receive 90 - 15 = 75%.).  

## Programming Language Selection

For all projects, the class will use the C programming language.  C is the
language of choice for software simulators for CPU designs.

## Participating in Class

Questions and comments are invited and strongly encouraged.  If you have a view
point or experience that may enrich the class, please jump in!  There are
several ways you can participate:

1. In-class

    If you are in-person and you have a question, just interrupt me and
interject.  If you are online unmute your mic and interject.  Raising your hand
is optional (whether physical or virtual).  If I miss your raised hand, it's
not because I want to ignore you but it's probably because there are too many
things going on at the same time.  So interrupting me is not rude, it's a
necessity.

    If you don't have a mic or other circumstances prevent you from asking on
Zoom, please post the question on Teams.  Use the "Posts" tab on the "General"
channel.  I want you to use Teams instead of Zoom because Zoom chats don't get
recorded and they evaporate when the meeting ends.  Teams posts and chats are
persistent and can be viewed by asynchronous students later on.  I wlll be
monitoring Teams posts during the lecture.

2. Offline

    Please use the Teams "Posts" tab on the "General" channel if you have a
general question or comment about the lecture.  If you have a question about a
specific topic for which there is a dedicated channel, please use that channel.
Channels for homeworks and projects will be added on as the class progresses.
Remember, you are encouraged to answer as well as ask questions!  I will give a
thumbs up on verified answers or I will add a few more things if needed.

    You can also DM (direct message) me or another student in the class.
Again, select the class in the "Teams" menu and then click on the "..." context
menu beside the "CS 1541 Computer Architecture" team name.  Please select the
top-most item: "Manage Team".  There, you should be able to see the statuses of
all students in the class, and if you hover over the name of any student, you
should see options to initiate a chat, email, or a call with that individual.

3. Email / Canvas messages

    For the fastest response, please use Teams.

When you ask a question about a project, please submit your source code to
GradeScope so that I can reproduce your error.  Also, describe precisely the
steps I should take to reproduce your error.  Before you do this, it is very
hard for me to help you.

I will try to get back to all offline communications within 24 hours of
receipt.  Even if I'm logged into Teams, please understand that I may be away
from my desk or working on something else.  Meanwhile, feel free to answer each
other's questions!

## Disability Services Statement

"The Office of Disability Resources and Services (DRS) provides a broad range
of support services to assist students with disabilities. Services include, but
are not limited to, tape-recorded textbooks, sign language interpreters,
adaptive and transportation. Contact DRS at 412-648-7890 or 412-383-1355 (TTY)
in 216 William Pitt Union or see www.drs.pitt.edu for more computer technology,
Braille translation, and nonstandard exam arrangements, DRS can also assist
students with accessibility to campus housing information."

The instructor will work to the best of their ability to accommodate any issues
arising from a disability that a student has, but he must be aware of it in
order to accommodate it.  Please inform me as soon as possible if you have a
disability which you think may hinder your success in the course and we (along
with the DRS) should be able to work around it.

## Academic Integrity Statement

Cheating/plagiarism will _not_ be tolerated. Students suspected of violating
the University of Pittsburgh Policy on Academic Integrity, from the February
1974 Senate Committee on Tenure and Academic Freedom reported to the Senate
Council, will be required to participate in the outlined procedural process as
initiated by the instructor. A minimum sanction of a zero score for the exam or
assignment will be imposed.

View the complete policy at www.cfo.pitt.edu/policies/policy/02/02-03-02.html.

Some guidelines:

_1. For TopHat lecture questions, you are free to share and discuss your answers._

_2. For all homeworks, projects, and exams, viewing the work done by your
classmates (or a 3rd source) before submission is considered cheating.  Showing
your work is also considered to be abetting cheating._ 

_3. If you have a question that does not require showing your work, I encourage
you to post it publicly on Teams.  Keeping it public acts as a psychological
guardrail; if you are hesitant about communicating publicly, chances are that
you subconsciously are aware that you are compromising your integrity._

_4. If you have a question that does require showing your work, please initiate
a chat with your instructor on Teams._
